It was very difficult
to reach these territories
because we had to navigate
through part of the Orinoco
and then onto other smaller rivers.
Many of their communities are far away.
The first time we came,
we traveled on the roof of a boat.
We are within days
(approximately seven days)
from our place of origin,
where our family is.
Another challenge is the language.
We realized that many
did not understand a word.
In this assignment,
we have come across
seven different languages.
Initially, this was a demanding task.
Imagine having so much to say
and not being understood.
We were able to overcome it
because, at this point,
we feel that what we preach in their language
—it is reaching their hearts.
They understand.
We can see it in their faces.
And that motivates them
to make changes in their life.
This led a group of brothers
to put forward
the idea of having our own boat
for the purpose
of preaching the good news
of the Kingdom in this area.
And that’s when finally the project
of El Precursor del Amazonas was born.
The branch arranged
for a committee to handle
the task of managing
and caring for the boat.
They also prepare
the travel itinerary during the year.
They conduct important meetings,
such as the pre-departure meeting
—which aims to train
the assigned passengers,
giving them necessary
guidelines and instructions
to be observed during the trip.
They also assign
the different crews to man the boat.
In the morning,
you get up before dawn
—most likely six in the morning,
half past five.
It’s still a little dark.
Morning worship is conducted
at approximately seven o’clock;
some instructions are given;
and after offering up a prayer,
we eat calmly
at about half past seven.
During the trip,
there’s a chance to read.
There are assignments,
such as cleaning the boat, cooking.
Actually, we stay pretty busy.
And at the end of the day,
we arrive at a beach or a community.
No comparison
between traveling before and traveling now.
Now we travel by limousine.
It’s luxurious
—“five star” or something like that.
Yes,
traveling in seats, for example,
with a group of brothers,
with a formal meal service,
with electricity.
Meetings are held;
we consider the daily text.
We share experiences,
tell stories; we do everything!
It’s like being in a miniature Kingdom Hall,
traveling for five days.
We also preach
in the different communities along the way.
It has its own publications
and a literature cart.
That makes it a very spiritual
and upbuilding experience for all of us.
The way the boat looked to them,
captured the indigenous peoples’ interest.
The dignified presentation
of the boat
is something worthy
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I also noticed that
where we were sitting,
we had a little area,
like a locker for each person.
That made it very comfortable
—things that didn’t exist in boats for rent.
El Precursor del Amazonas
has been a blessing for us.
We were able to bring our food
and some of the things we needed,
such as a refrigerator to keep it in.
Those things have been made possible,
thanks to Jehovah,
who allowed us to have this boat.
At times,
we have arrived at a point where
we nearly run out of all the supplies,
and something always happens
—brothers arrive
or El Precursor del Amazonas comes.
At the end,
we learned to be in want
but also to have
an abundance.
Seeing all this
makes us feel protected
—even though we are here
in the middle of the jungle.
People here in Amazonas
know that there is a God
who gives them food,
provides them the river,
gives them the rain
that keeps them alive.
But they didn’t know
that Jehovah is that God.
And that is our job
—to teach these people
that Jehovah is the true God.
When you see the sparkle
in the eyes of your Bible students
when they understand the truth,
there is nothing like it.
It compensates for any discomfort.
That’s priceless!
So being in this work
is the best thing you can do
because it causes true happiness.
I am proud
of being with Jehovah’s people.
Now I enjoy watching the videos
with my family.
I conduct a family study,
and I preach with my children,
giving the message
to the people.
Sometimes you have to reject Bible studies
—something that seems a strange thing
for a Jehovah’s Witness to do,
turn down Bible studies.
Rather, we always want
to have studies.
But there are so many
that if we start giving them all,
it will be impossible.
So, then, sometimes we choose
to tell people to wait a bit
and that we’ll return
on another occasion.
And sometimes
up to one year will pass by.
We have visited people
from a year ago
that had not been spoken to since,
and they say:
“Hey, a year ago you said you’d return,
and now here you are.
But it’s been a year, brother!”
I feel good,
and I am teaching them in Curripaco.
So they can speak to people
about Jehovah in Curripaco.
To share in one of the preaching trips
of El Precursor del Amazonas
is a unique and unforgettable experience.
Your faith is strengthened when you return,
and you are made more aware of the need
for additional workers for the harvest.